names like polybius have become
exotic and strange to us in the 21st
century
but it's not that they were well known
to the average american
it's that they were well known to the
type of guy
who wrote the constitution of the united
states of america
at some point we have to take a step
back and ask ourselves about the
limitations
of an economic and pragmatic explanation
for how it is the united states of
america ended up with a system of
government
derivative of an author famous at that
time
and totally forgotten today like
philippines
in politics both in the present tense
and in the writing of history economics
often becomes a place to hide
from the importance of ideas ideas that
really shape
the decisions people make ideas that
have terrible
terrible consequences
people are very eager to imagine
that slavery was abolished for economic
reasons and they're very eager to
imagine that slavery was created in the
first place
as an institution and culturally for
economic reasons
it's so much easier to believe in
economics
and to look to economic explanations
than to deal with
the stupidity and the immorality
of the ideas that guide people's actions
now
idea has positive connotations
in english right when we say idealism
or idealistic we just kind of presume
this is a good thing if you're getting
serious
about the origins of the nazi ideology
in germany you got to deal with ideas
you got to deal with idealism of a most
sickening
and disturbing kind and it's because
people find it so disturbing
that they reach for these economic
explanations for fascism that are
meaningless
that have no explanatory power that take
nothing away from the past and add
nothing to the present of the future
it's
it's i've heard it so many
times
oh well you know the consequences of the
peace
and world war one and uh monetary policy
and hyperinflation it
if you want to understand the origin of
the nazi ideology in germany
you would be better off doing research
on christianity
on what was going on in the lutheran
faith at that time like
just even a specific little box within
christianity in the 20th century in
german
late 19th century right you can look at
what's going on in
spiritualist new cult movements because
there was a lot of that
a lot of supernatural spooky stuff right
sure and you could look at
biology evolution and all the crazy
political ideologies that come with that
all right tragically
ideas matter right people will assume
you're saying something positive and
inspiring and uplifting you say hey
ideas matter history is made you know
like history to the world changes
because people have new ideas
right guess what most of the time it's a
tragedy most of the time it's sickening
all right the justifications for slavery
christopher columbus
you know reinventing slavery in the new
west slavery had existed before but not
like this this is a whole new concept of
slavery
international race-based slavery linking
africa to the new world and so on
okay it came out of a set of ideas it
came with a set of ideals
it can't be explained through the dry
economic facts
of history an earlier video i talked
about the importance of this book
i've now bought a second copy i bought
one for myself
and i bought one for my mom this is
woody holton's
unruly americans if you are going to buy
one book
on the origins of the american
constitution for your mother
this year i totally endorse the
terrorism it's a brilliant book
it's a wonderful book it's totally okay
but the purpose of this video is to
criticize it
and to criticize the tendency many of us
have
to favor economic explanations
over dealing with ideas and ideals
and if you like some of the cultural
baggage
of why historical decisions were made in
the way
that they were um
if you had a friend who grew up
in cambodia and you know they grew up
there and they saw some
american movies they saw some american
tv shows but they grew up speaking the
cambodian language
and they are genuinely authentically
culturally
alien from the united states of america
they have no understanding
and then they grow up and their parents
force them to learn english as a second
language
10 11 12 years old start learning
english they go to high school
they start getting more interested in
learning english they go to university
and let's just say
they become highly educated enough to
try to get a university degree
in english language and now they're
looking at things differently now
they're looking at
the political reality of what america is
and how it operates and they're asking
questions that all come back to this
thing you guys worship you guys have so
much respect for
called the constitution what what
why did america bomb cambodia what
why do you guys call this the secret war
what do you you know once you start
asking questions about
oh and you never really declared war and
politically how things happened you know
in his own
country this this hypothetical student
plays like cambodia laos and vietnam
maybe that's the flashback maybe it's
just what this person sees in the news
right now
they're looking at the reality of 20
years of war
in afghanistan they're looking at the
reality of police brutality
and people burning down buildings and
killing cops on the streets sometimes
all the
you know conflicts that have come out of
the year 2020 and questioning the world
policeman
and then they're looking at this thing
called the constitution that everyone
quotes
and everyone cites and they're looking
at the wikipedia and they come to you
and they ask
how did this happen why
is america the way that it is why is the
constitution
written this way
are you going to say to them well you
have to understand
at that time there was an economic
crisis
people had no paper money so they
couldn't pay their taxes
and they couldn't pay their debts unless
like as farmers
they literally took their cows to the
courthouse to try to pay their taxes or
pay their debts
in kind so the farmers rose up in
rebellion
they didn't want to be ruined by the new
taxes they didn't want to be ruined by
paying their debts
back to primarily british investors they
just
fought a war against england the
american revolution they just fought a
rebellion
and now here they were being bankrupted
the whole economy was in ruins
it's devastated and you know
all of the soldiers who had fought in
the revolution were given these kind of
coupons they were given these
special vouchers that the government
said they'd redeem
in future and they'd you know pay
interest on
but most of the soldiers were poor so
they sold those to wealthy investors and
then the wealthy investors had
stockpiled these special coupons from
war veterans
and they were trying to get money out of
the government to pay that back but the
government couldn't collect taxes
it's fascinating it's important everyone
should know this kind of background and
it does
it does explain the series of short-term
crises and compromises
that made the american constitution the
way it is but it leaves so much
unexplained now in the writing of
history
we may say in the history of history the
pendulum seems to swing back and forth
on this
you will go through periods of time
where people really believe in
the economic explanations for slavery
and the abortion of slavery
and then someone stands up and writes a
book and said no
ideas matter what was going on
religiously and philosophically at the
time of what books people were reading
it really matters and that really
explains why slavery was abolished
when it was and in the way that it was
in the united states
in thailand in china in
france in haiti right the abolition of
slavery is a different history in each
of these places
but ideas play an important role in each
one
and it can't be reduced to simple
economic factors the french revolution
in some ways parallel to the american
revolution in some ways a contrast to it
ever since karl marx
people have been trying to reduce what
happened in the french revolution
to some set of simple economic interests
like you know well this can be explained
because people in paris didn't have
enough bread
i'm simply buying slaves guess what
there always had been poverty in paris
poverty wasn't new poverty wasn't
different the wars of the time weren't
even
new or different you know what was new
or different in the years leading up to
the french revolution
ideas all right the books that were
published by people like voltaire
and jean-jacques rousseau and boswell
with his journey to corsica all right
you know what the ideas
really mattered they really presented
people with new options and new
opportunities they'd they never
thought of before and the deepest
source of influence of all in terms of
forming the ideology
of the british empire the ideology of
the french empire
and the ideology of the particular
members of the economic elite
who wrote the british pardon me who
wrote the american constitution
england still doesn't have a
constitution by the way i misspoke there
because
who wrote the british constitution but
he wrote the american constitution
in the ashes of the british empire right
it's plutarch plutarch's lives
how many people how many of you have
read plutarch how many of you have heard
the name
plutarch right you didn't you didn't
learn this in high school
people like
people like polybius really other than
my youtube channel
in your whole life how many times have
you heard the name polybius
cicero and sallust on catalin's
conspiracy
the name cicero remains known
because he appeared in a few action
movies and
soap operas like gladiator
and hbo's room but nobody actually reads
no pressure reads
cicero right there was an ideology there
there
was a set of ideas that was as familiar
to those men then as it is alien and
exotic to us now and
in that study you find in a meaningful
sense
the explanation for why the american
constitution is the way that it is
don't you and including honestly not
just the significance of slavery
significance of genocide or imperialism
or empire in america
i think you find a really profound and
meaningful explanation for the problems
we have today with with police
brutality okay so the pendulum does
swing back and forth
i would say two guys who illustrate the
extremes on this
is woody holton who i'm a huge fan of
right but then the other extreme you got
a guy like
bernard balen so bernard balan many many
years before he wrote this book
he became famous he made his name and he
won a bunch of awards
by writing a book called the ideological
origins
of the american revolution
that title
why is it striking why does it matter
it's because there were a lot of people
who didn't think of
the origins in the american constitution
as ideological it was saying hey
ideas matter we have to get back to
dealing with the ideology
this sprung from as opposed to
the interpretation of the authors of the
constitution as being a
cynical conspiracy of the economic elite
acting in their own self-interest a
trend that as i discussed in an earlier
youtube video
really was started by an historian named
charles beard right the charles beard
tendency that is in some ways being
reinvented and revived in a
much more intelligent and meaningful
form today by authors like woody holton
oh might as well get the exercise in
lifting these books
uh michael j clareman and yeah another
colleague of theirs
this book i have not bought who i'm less
impressed with frankly
uh terry bowden all right so
i used to work in the publishing
industry and i know that as an author
you have only a limited amount of
control
over what's on the cover of your book
what's on the back yearbook and what's
in the advertising blurb
many of my viewers english is not their
first language blur b-l-u-r-b
right blurb it's a real word tragically
in our language look it up
all right the advertising blurb for this
makes this bold and ridiculous statement
that what this book will teach you
is how the average american how poor and
downtrodden farmers
how the dispossessed and slaves and so
on how the average american and the poor
played their role in the writing of the
constitution
and what i would say to you is what this
book demonstrates brilliantly
is the exact opposite it demonstrates
how and to what extent and in what way
the american constitution was written by
and for
a very definite small elite
it was a very specific socio economic
elite and what he proves
beautifully brilliantly quoting them in
their own words
is that they were self-consciously aware
that they were part of a kind of
anti-democratic
counter-revolution that the first
revolution the american revolution
itself
had produced these more or less
disorganized
slightly antarctic populist democratic
governments 13 of them in the colonies
and that they saw the main defect
of these governments as being democracy
itself
so they had to get their act together
they had to get organized
and they had to create a new system of
government that they themselves
understood to be less democratic this
isn't my opinion
this isn't woody holton's opinion this
isn't a criticism of them this isn't
some kind of
ironical post-modern view of it that
they were aware of this themselves
that that was what they were doing but
here's what woody holton's
you know account doesn't touch right
what were the sources they were working
from where did they get their ideas
of democracy and a republic
and what the alternative to democracy
was where was it they got this idea of
an explicitly elitist
almost aristocratic system of government
right
and the answer
right it's it's in books like these
right the fact is that these guys grew
up
worshipping cicero worshipping salist's
account of the catalan conspiracy right
worshiping polybius really it's only a
few pages of police and these were not
average americans these were not
ordinary people
these were guys who were part of a very
palpable
social elite that defined itself
primarily
by having this kind of greco-roman
classical education so that
i don't think a single one of these guys
had read aristotle's politics
from cover to cover to use one example i
doubt any of them read polybius's
histories from cover to cover quite like
quite likely they never read uh
cicero's orations on catalina all right
these were men who from some early stage
in their childhood
had sat with a tutor in front of a
chalkboard who
gave them brief inspirational quotations
in greek in latin or in both and
explained the grammar
and told the story surrounding it right
these were men who had learned
latin quite possibly by reading salist
in particular it's it's in very simple
blunt latin
they definitely learned greek uh from
anabasis
by xenophon that's it is the
foundational
text these guys they read stories that
glorified the heroism
of particular political leaders in the
ancient greek and ancient roman
context that glorified war that
glorified
empire and that gave them as an elite
a cultural identity that was
qualitatively different
from the common run of men who grew up
reading
the bible and for whom the
judeo-christian bible and the
judeo-christian
literature was their high culture it
wasn't for these guys it wasn't for the
men
who wrote the constitution right
now i started this video by saying to
you very clearly the fact that i say
something is an idea
or is an ideal does not mean that i
regard it as a good thing
i'm not saying this to glorify that
british empire culture i despise it and
it was a culture
that you know was built on genocide and
slavery
not just in north america but all around
the world
names like polybius have become
exotic and strange to us in the 21st
century
but it's not that they were well known
to the average
american it's that they were well known
to the type
of guy who wrote the constitution of the
united states of america
what was it that these guys had in
common
with the revolutionaries in france
it was that they had read plutarch's
lives
plutarch's lives of the ancient greeks
and romans and that was what they'd
grown up on
now again i'm not claiming any of these
guys were accomplished enough
in latin or greek to read any of these
texts from cover to cover
in latin greek it is quite possible they
sat with the school master
and they read just a few sentences and
got these
illuminating motivating passages that
are full of
very powerful messages about what it
means
to be a man about what it means to fight
for the republic right and that
heaps scorn on the primitive
notion of living in a society ruled by a
king
the average american reading the bible
didn't see it that way right the bible
is completely based
on the the brutally simple rule of kings
can read it from cover to cover
there's no model of democracy there's no
model overflow you know
any of these texts even if it's just
like oh well yes in primitive societies
and in ancient times in our own culture
we were just ruled by a king
but really i mean who can take seriously
a society
that's just based on being ruled by a
king right
all of these present this powerful
intoxicating notion of what it means to
be a man
what it means to be a political leader
right and what it means to be
a part of a society that we could now
call a republic or a democracy
let's suppose your friend from cambodia
asks you
sincerely why is it
that the constitution the united states
is so pagan
why is it that it's so utterly lacking
in judeo-christian sources or
judeo-christian influence i think the
answer to this question you know in a
really interesting way
is at the intersection of you know the
kind of approach woody holton has
and the more idea-focused approach i'm
proposing
in this video because you need to know
both you need to know
the united states of america at that
time there were bible bashers
there were people who were quoting the
bible and who in the decades of debate
about what kind of
constitution and what kind of government
the united states of america should have
by the way a debate that happened again
and again because each of the 13
colonies
had to write its own constitution right
and then you have a gap of 10 or 12
years and then you have the federal
constitution and you had all the
debates before that like whether or not
you should fight a revolution at all or
what side you're on and
declaration of independence so you had
it wasn't just one debate at one time
yes there were millions of people or at
least hundreds of thousands of people
who really passionately cared about the
bible and who saw in the bible
the model for a better society but
here's the problem and here's why the
whole
greco-roman educated latin and greek
educated
social elite were set against what they
found in the pages of the bible
okay the problem is that the model of a
society
set down in the bible is very centrally
based
on the idea of the redistribution of
land and the forgiveness of debts
to achieve equality so the most
important debate that is
in some ways brilliantly demonstrated in
this book but in some ways also kind of
sidelined and suffocated and it's more
economic and pragmatic analysis
right is the debate between people who
were
inspired by and influenced by the bible
and who were
in the terms used at the time levelers
who believed in
levelism who believed in equality
egalitarianism
and sadly i don't mean equality between
black people white people
and i don't mean equality between white
europeans and the indigenous people they
were committing genocide against
no this was a totally racist
self-centered form of equality
there were farmers who read in the bible
that what a good society is supposed to
be like is one that periodically
after so many years takes land away from
the rich
and gives it to the poor that
redistributes
land ownership so that each family has
an equal plot of land people who argued
passionately that you cannot have a
republic
without equality and that democracy is
meaningless
if your society is ruled by a small
presumably corrupt
economic elite disenfranchising or
silencing
the poor majority
and the people who wrote the
constitution were of the opposite
persuasion
the people who wrote the constitution
instead felt that they had a lot more in
common
with senators in rome like cicero
and salist here they felt that what they
were fighting against was
in its way catalin's conspiracy
we're living through a period of time
when americans are asking themselves as
never before
why does this country exist
america what's the point
simplistic explanations that were
proffered during the cold war
that we have freedom and they don't
they don't make sense anymore and they
will never make sense
again people are asking in a more
meaningful way than ever before
why is the united states the way it is
why does it have to be this way
how can it change why why can't it
change
why are we still stuck with these
fundamentally anti-democratic
assumptions
from centuries ago that we are forced
from childhood
to call a democracy when in so many ways
we know that it isn't why is it that
these men
who gathered at one time in one place to
solve a series of short-term
crises with a bunch of very strange
compromises
why is it that they created a system of
government
that was explicitly less democratic
than that of ancient rome that
explicitly excluded
and omitted the few aspects of
cicero's rome for example that were
meant to
represent and give a voice to the poor
rome
as terrible system of government as it
had built on slavery
et cetera et cetera they had something
called the tribunes
for the poor right how is it that you
got a bunch of guys together in a room
who worship these ancient greco-roman
sources
and who consciously and intentionally
create a system of government that is
less democratic than the 13
constitutions of state governments
that came before them but that is also
less democratic
than ancient athens or ancient rome the
models of government
they claim to emulate will it be long
will it be long before we are facing the
kind of uprisings
against the senate that actually each
and every historical political source in
ancient rome that we have
describes i mean the city of rome was
not a peaceful place it was in a
constant state not of civil war but of
class war how is it that you have guys
who are looking at this
great variety of you know new and
inspiring intellectual sources from
france
in the decades leading up to this time
and to some extent even
simultaneously and they pick and choose
among them
to find the most cynically authoritarian
system of government possible
that even the contemporary french
intellectuals alive at that time they
were able to turn around and criticize
the constitutional united states and say
hey wait
you guys are calling this a democracy
but you're doing this this this and this
wrong
why is it instead that you're creating a
kind of oligarchy a kind of
aristocracy this this explicitly
literally discovered all right
these are questions these are questions
that will have to be asked now
and in future as never before as i say
i think this is a brilliant book i
encourage all you to buy it
i encourage all of you to read it but it
also makes us
face up to this question of at what
point do we reach the limits of what
economics
and pragmatic analysis can explain to us
and at what point do we have to take a
step back and say wait
ideas matter culture matters
at some point we have to take a step
back and ask ourselves about the
limitations
of an economic and pragmatic explanation
for how it is that the united states of
america ended up with a system of
government
derivative of an author famous at that
time
and totally forgotten today like
polybius
and my point is not that the answers to
that question are going
to be good or inspirational or uplifting
i think what we're going to do
is rediscover the stupidity of our
ancestors and start asking ourselves
much more difficult questions about
america
what's next
[Music]
maybe we can we can practice
yes